---
title: "The Flaming Lips - American Head"
date: "2020-09-28"
categories: 
  - "reviews"
  - "reviews-audio"
---

 From the moment they have the opportunity to hear _American Head_, there's no doubt that Flaming Lips fans will rejoice at the band's return, for several different reasons. Some fans will just be happy the band is back with new music. Other fans will be thrilled that, for the first time in over a decade, the Flaming Lips have returned to a more rock permutation of their sound (last time was on _At War With The Mystics_ in 2006). Some fans may note the more solemn impetus for the album's creation (according to a press release, the death of Tom Petty in 2017 inspired the music and thematic arc through the running of _American Head_), but will also cheer the album for its form, structure and style. All of those angles at which one may choose to look upon _American Head_ are perfectly valid and make sense; no matter how one chooses to look at _American Head_ though, it's a great album and its quality is undeniable.

Arguably the best part about _American Head_ (especially in the uncertain times of 2020) is how jubilant and hopeful the album is. While recent albums like _Oczy Mlody_ and _The Terror_ made the most of dark and textural sounds, the chimes and bells which have a habit of appearing in songs like “Dinosaurs on The Mountain,” “Assassins of Youth,” “God and The Policeman” and “Will You Return When You Come Down,” combined with Wayne Coyne's breathless and high-pitched vocal delivery, give _American Head_ a dreamy and wistful through-line which is easy to embrace and will cause listeners to instantly accept the turn that the album represents, gladly. Likewise, the mid-tempo, very Pink Floydian  presentation of songs like “Flowers of Neptune,” “At The Movies on Quaaludes” and “Mother I've Taken LSD” (which, thematically, feels like it should be a lost cut from the band's earliest recordings) feel very easy on the ear and seems destined to mark a new kind of turn for the Flaming Lips on stage – whenever the band finally gets to return to the stage.

By the time “My Religion Is You” gently closes out the album with a spare arrangement and very heartfelt sentiments, listeners will find they've been sold on this new incarnation of the Flaming Lips, and hope the band's stays where they are to examine this sound some more on future releases. Of course, because of the bittersweet context of the composition of this album, the likelihood of the band remaining in this area is not at all a foregone conclusion – but the most enduring aspect of _American Head_ is a sense of hope and that's just what listeners will be doing after they've run top to bottom with this album
